Added guide about schemaless usage of quickwit (#1508)
quickwit-oss/quickwit: docs/guides/schemaless.md

---
title: Schemaless
sidebar_position: 4
---

# Strict schema or schemaless?

> Quickwit let's you place the cursor on how strict you would like your schema to be. In other words, it is possible to operate Quickwit with a very strict mapping, in an entirely schemaless manner, and anywhere in between.  Let's see how this works!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Quickwit lets you place the cursor on how strict you would like your schema to be. In other words, it is possible to operate Quickwit with a very strict mapping, in an entirely schemaless manner, and anywhere in between. Let's see how this works!
```

## A strict mapping

That's the most straightforward approach.
As a user, you need to precisely define the list of fields to be ingested by Quickwit.

> For instance, a reasonable mapping for an application log could be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, a reasonable mapping for an application log could be:
```

```yaml
version: 0

> index_id: "my_app"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
index_id: my_app
```

doc_mapping:
  mode: strict # <--- The mode attribute
  field_mappings:
    - name: timestamp
      type: i64
      fast: true
    - name: server
      tokenizer: raw
    - name: message
      type: text
      record: position
    - name: severity
      tokenizer: raw

indexing_settings:
  timestamp_field: timestamp

search_settings:
  default_search_fields: [severity, message]
```

The `mode` attribute controls what should be done if an ingested document
contains a field that is not defined in the document mapping. By default, it takes the `lenient` value. In `lenient` mode, the fields that do not appear in the document mapping will simply be ignored.

If `mode` is set to `strict` on the other hand, documents containing fields
that are not defined in the mapping will be entirely discarded.

## Schemaless with a partial schema

`mode` can take another value: `dynamic`.
When set to dynamic, all extra fields will actually be mapped using a catch-all configuration.

> By default, this catch-all configuration index and store all of these fields, but this can be configured by settings the [`dynamic_mapping` attribute](../configuration/index-config#mode).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this catch-all configuration indexes and stores all of these fields, but this can be configured by settings the [`dynamic_mapping` attribute](../configuration/index-config#mode).
```

A minimalist, yet perfectly valid and useful index configuration is then:

```yaml
version: 0
index_id: "my_dynamic_index"
doc_mapping:
  mode: dynamic
```

> With this configuration, it is possible to ingest any JSON object and search for them.

Reviewer 2: we should probably mention that every query would need to define the search fields to find something

> With this configuration, it is possible to ingest any JSON object and search for them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration makes it possible to ingest any JSON object and search them.
```

But dynamic mode can also be used in conjunction with field mappings.
This combination is especially powerful for event logs which cannot be mapped to a single schema.

> For instance, let's consider the following user event log.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, let's consider the following user event log:
```
